Project Understanding - Sales Data Pipeline
From Start to End


What This Project Is About

This project is a batch data pipeline that processes daily sales data. The idea is simple - we have raw sales data coming in every day, and we need to clean it, transform it, validate it, and store it in a proper format so it can be used for reporting or analytics downstream.

This is exactly how data pipelines work in real companies. Data comes in raw, gets processed through multiple stages, and lands in a storage layer in a clean and structured format. Every step is logged, every failure is handled, and the whole thing runs automatically on a schedule.

The tech stack we used is Apache Airflow for orchestration, PySpark for data processing, MinIO as S3-compatible object storage, and Astronomer for running Airflow locally inside Docker on Windows.


The Data

The source data is a CSV file called sales.csv sitting in the input_data folder. It has the following columns - order_id, product_id, amount, and date. The data intentionally has problems in it - there are NULL values in the amount column, there are duplicate rows, and there are negative amounts. This is realistic because in real projects source data is never clean.

Sample data looks like this:
order_id 1, product_id 101, amount 200, date 2024-01-01
order_id 4, product_id 103, amount NULL, date 2024-01-02
order_id 5, product_id 102, amount 150, date 2024-01-03 (duplicated)
order_id 6, product_id 104, amount -50, date 2024-01-03


Project Folder Structure

data_pipeline_project
    dags - contains the Airflow DAG file that defines the pipeline
    data - contains raw and processed data folders
        raw - where ingested CSV lands
        processed - where cleaned parquet files are written
    input_data - source CSV file lives here
    scripts - the actual pipeline logic
        ingest.py - copies source data to raw folder
        transform.py - cleans and transforms data using PySpark
        validate.py - validates the processed output
        incremental.py - tracks which dates have already been processed
    utils - shared utilities
        spark_session.py - creates and returns a Spark session
        s3_utils.py - handles upload and download to S3 or MinIO
        logger.py - shared logger used across all scripts
    logs - pipeline logs written here
    Dockerfile - custom Docker image with Java installed
    docker-compose.override.yml - adds MinIO container to the setup
    requirements.txt - Python dependencies
    .env - environment variables including storage credentials


Step 1 - Setting Up Java

PySpark needs Java to run. The first problem we hit was that even though Java 17 was installed, the system was still using Java 8 because the old Oracle Java paths were at the top of the Windows PATH variable.

We fixed this by going into System Environment Variables, removing the two Oracle Java entries from PATH, setting JAVA_HOME to point to the Java 17 installation at C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-17, and adding the Java 17 bin folder to the top of PATH.

After reopening the terminal, java -version showed 17.0.12 and JAVA_HOME was correctly set.


Step 2 - Running the Pipeline Scripts Locally

Once Java was fixed, we ran the three scripts directly from the terminal to verify the pipeline logic worked before bringing Airflow into the picture.

python scripts/ingest.py
This copies the sales.csv from input_data to data/raw/sales.csv. Simple file copy with error handling.

python scripts/transform.py
This is where PySpark does the heavy lifting. It reads the raw CSV, shows the initial data, removes rows with NULL values, filters out negative amounts, drops duplicate rows, then aggregates total sales by date. The result is written as a partitioned parquet file under data/processed/sales with partitioning by date column. This is a real-world optimization - partitioning by date means downstream queries only scan the relevant partition instead of the whole dataset.

python scripts/validate.py
This reads the processed parquet back using PySpark and runs three checks - no null values in total_sales, no negative values in total_sales, and the dataset is not empty. If any check fails it raises an assertion error with a clear message.

The first time we ran transform, it failed with a HADOOP_HOME error because on Windows, PySpark needs winutils.exe to write files. We fixed this by downloading winutils.exe for Hadoop 3 and placing it in C:\hadoop\bin, then setting HADOOP_HOME to C:\hadoop in system environment variables.

The second issue was that validate.py was using pandas to read the parquet file, but the parquet files written by Spark 4.x use a newer format that the installed version of pyarrow could not read. We fixed this by switching validate.py to use PySpark to read the parquet instead of pandas.

After both fixes, all three scripts ran successfully and the output showed:
date 2024-01-01, total_sales 350
date 2024-01-02, total_sales 300
date 2024-01-03, total_sales 150


Step 3 - Adding Logging, Error Handling, and Incremental Logic

Once the basic pipeline worked, we upgraded it to production quality.

Logging - we created a shared logger in utils/logger.py that writes to both the console and a log file at logs/pipeline.log. Every script imports this logger and logs key events like how many rows were loaded, how many remained after cleaning, and whether the run succeeded or failed.

Error handling - every script wraps its main logic in try/except blocks. If something fails, the error is logged with a clear message and the exception is re-raised so Airflow can mark the task as failed and trigger a retry.

Incremental processing - we created scripts/incremental.py which maintains a JSON file at data/incremental_tracker.json. Every time a date is successfully processed, it gets recorded in this file. When ingest runs, it first checks if today's date is already in the tracker. If it is, it skips the run entirely. This prevents reprocessing the same data if the pipeline is triggered multiple times on the same day, which is a very common requirement in production pipelines.


Step 4 - Setting Up Airflow with Astronomer

Apache Airflow does not run natively on Windows. Instead of using WSL or a manual setup, we used Astronomer CLI which runs Airflow inside Docker containers. This is actually how most companies run Airflow in development environments.

We installed Astronomer CLI and ran astro dev init inside the project folder. This created the necessary config files. Then astro dev start pulled the Astro runtime Docker image and started all the Airflow components - scheduler, api-server, dag-processor, triggerer, and postgres database.

The Airflow UI runs at http://localhost:8080 with credentials admin/admin.

The DAG file at dags/pipeline_dag.py defines the pipeline as three tasks in sequence - ingest, then transform, then validate. Each task is a PythonOperator that calls the corresponding function from the scripts folder. The DAG is scheduled to run daily and has a retry count of 2 with a 5 minute delay between retries.

One issue we hit was that the DAG was importing scripts and utils at the top level, but inside Docker those folders are mounted at /usr/local/airflow and the imports were failing. We fixed this by moving the imports inside the task functions so they only get resolved at runtime when the path is already set correctly.

Another issue was that the Airflow 3.x runtime inside the Docker container did not have Java installed, so PySpark could not start. We fixed this by customizing the Dockerfile to install Java using apt-get install default-jdk and setting JAVA_HOME to the correct path inside the container.


Step 5 - Adding MinIO for Object Storage

In real projects, processed data does not just sit on a local disk. It gets uploaded to object storage like AWS S3 so it can be accessed by other teams, BI tools, or downstream pipelines.

Since setting up an AWS account was not immediately available, we used MinIO which is an open source S3-compatible storage server. It has the exact same API as S3, uses the same boto3 Python client, and stores data in the same bucket and key structure. The only difference is it runs locally in Docker instead of on AWS.

We added MinIO to the project by creating a docker-compose.override.yml file. Astro automatically picks up this file and includes it when starting the project. MinIO runs on port 9000 for the API and port 9001 for the web UI.

The MinIO UI is accessible at http://localhost:9001 with credentials minioadmin/minioadmin.

We created utils/s3_utils.py which handles three things - creating an S3 client using boto3, ensuring the target bucket exists before uploading, and walking through the local processed folder to upload each parquet file to the correct path in the bucket.

The upload path follows the pattern processed/sales/run_date=2026-04-30/filename.parquet which is the standard Hive-style partitioning format used in data lakes. This makes it easy for tools like Athena, Spark, or Presto to query the data directly from the bucket.

The S3 integration is controlled by an environment variable S3_ENABLED. When it is set to true, the transform script uploads the processed files after writing them locally. When it is false, the upload is skipped. This makes it easy to run the pipeline locally without storage configured.

All credentials and configuration are stored in the .env file which is excluded from version control via .gitignore.


How the Full Pipeline Runs End to End

When the DAG is triggered, either manually or on its daily schedule, this is what happens in order.

The ingest task runs first. It checks the incremental tracker to see if today has already been processed. If yes, it logs a skip message and exits cleanly. If no, it copies the source CSV from input_data to data/raw/sales.csv and logs the completion.

The transform task runs next. It starts a Spark session, reads the raw CSV, logs the row count, displays the data, removes nulls, removes negatives, deduplicates, aggregates total sales by date, writes the result as a partitioned parquet file, displays the aggregated result, uploads to MinIO if S3 is enabled, marks the date as processed in the incremental tracker, and stops the Spark session.

The validate task runs last. It starts a fresh Spark session, reads the processed parquet, displays it, checks for nulls, checks for negatives, checks the row count is greater than zero, logs the validation result, and stops the Spark session.

If any task fails, Airflow retries it up to 2 times with a 5 minute gap. All task logs are visible in the Airflow UI and also written to the logs/pipeline.log file.


What Each File Does

scripts/ingest.py - copies source data to raw layer, checks incremental tracker before running
scripts/transform.py - PySpark job that cleans, deduplicates, aggregates, partitions, and uploads data
scripts/validate.py - PySpark job that reads processed data and runs quality checks
scripts/incremental.py - reads and writes the incremental tracker JSON file
utils/spark_session.py - single place to create a Spark session, used by transform and validate
utils/s3_utils.py - boto3 wrapper for S3 and MinIO operations
utils/logger.py - shared logger that writes to file and console
dags/pipeline_dag.py - Airflow DAG definition with task dependencies and retry config
Dockerfile - extends Astro runtime image with Java installation
docker-compose.override.yml - adds MinIO container to the Astro Docker environment
requirements.txt - pyspark, pandas, pyarrow, boto3
.env - environment variables for storage credentials, not committed to git


Things to Know When Running This Project

Java must be set correctly on the host machine. JAVA_HOME should point to Java 17 and the old Oracle Java paths must be removed from PATH.

When running locally outside Docker, the HADOOP_HOME environment variable must be set to a folder containing winutils.exe for Windows.

When running inside Astro Docker, Java is installed via the Dockerfile so no host Java configuration is needed.

The .env file must be filled with real values before starting Astro. For MinIO the credentials are minioadmin/minioadmin. For real AWS S3 replace those with actual IAM credentials and remove the endpoint URL variable.

The incremental tracker file lives at data/incremental_tracker.json. If you want to reprocess a date, either delete this file or remove the date entry from it manually.

Parquet files are written with snappy compression by default which is the standard in production data pipelines.
